---
date: 2017-05-30 00:00:00
title: Why the Consumer is So Frustrated With Retail Today
categories:
  - Industry Trends
  - Customer Fragmentation
  - retail
  - Consumer Behavior
author_staff_member: bob-stec
---


Much has been written about the decline and the forecasted death of retail brick and mortar in this country. Additionally, a lot of time and effort has been spent on diagnosing “WHY” this is occurring. Everyone from strategists to economists to retailers have taken a stab at explaining the cause of this decline. To get at the real truth behind this seismic shift, you need to look no further than the driver of the decline, the consumer themselves.The shifting patterns of who, what, when, where and how the US consumer is or is not buying apparel cannot be blamed on new technology, new channels or new social platforms.

## Shift in Retail

The shift in retail is driven solely by the dramatic shift on two fundamentally critical fronts.

First, the market makeup has been shifting and continues to shift from a fairly homogeneous composition of primarily baby boomers into a significantly splintered compilation consisting of Gen X, Milliennials, Gen Z and the remaining boomers. Within each of these large segments there exists multiple subsegments that have their own defining characteristics. This complex segmentation is compounded by the fact that the vast majority of retail platforms today have been founded and built on the strategic premise of large homogeneous groups of people that generally desire the same things. The resulting conflict between retail’s strategic foundation and today’s consumer composition is like trying to put the proverbial “round peg in a square hole.” Simply put, most retail platforms today are not strategically or operational set up to serve the splintered marketplace that they must pursue in order to be successful!

Secondly, the basic needs and desires of this fragmented marketplace are drastically different from that of the homogeneous boomer generation. Boomers were broadly bucketed as an aspirational group attracted to anything that fed their perception that their next purchase would continue to make their lives better. With boomers there was always a “next” and a “new and improved” purchase positioned to further satisfy their aspirational desire. Nothing could be further from the truth with the succeeding generations. Beginning with Gen X, consumers faced the likelihood that their position in life would not be better than their parents generation. Instead of complaining about this economic reality, they adjusted their needs and desires toward things that would satisfy them in ways that conspicuous consumption could not do. Each of the following generations attacked this issue in different ways but in general they all focused on needs/desires different from those that were the foundation of boomers. In general, they desire quantity over quality, favoring something unique or custom versus a multiple of sameness. They are highly tech enabled and use those tools not to simply shop but to become the most savvy, discerning and demanding consumers ever. They moved from aspirational needs to a more self-confident “for me” approach that favors authenticity and personalization rather than the need to aspire to something that they are not. Finally, they replaced the simple experience of “shopping” with the deep desire to have an “valuable experience” in each and every activity in which they take part. To that end, they compare and contrast the “shopping experience” with other available experiences and make decisions based on which one is more fulfilling.

With that basic background of consumer data (widely available to any retailer who has internet access), it is easy to see the major disconnect between existing retail strategies and tactics and the consumer segments that they so desperately need to attract. Retailers have resorted to ever increasing price promotion in a failed effort to attract consumers to the piles upon piles of merchandising sameness that they offer. Making those assortments available through mobile channels with next day delivery will not make the assortment more palatable to these consumer segments. All the new technology in the world will not make up for the lack of attractive brand stories, innovative product, compelling experiences and upgraded personalized service that these new consumers expect. If the foundational strategy of current retail stores does not shift to recognize the new consumer reality and the new set of needs/desires that this reality holds their impending doom will be sealed.

Consumers are not bypassing current retail formats because they are not technologically savvy enough. They are not passing by because the pricing is too high. They are not ignoring brick and mortar because they prefer to shop online.from their sofa. While these widely held theories are interesting, they fail to uncover the real issues of why the consumer base is dissatisfied with the traditional store assortment. They are staying away because the stores simply do not give them any compelling reasons to darken their doors. &nbsp;They get intrigued by fresh, relevant brand stories but few can be found. They have a thirst for innovative products but will not dig through “piles on the aisles” &nbsp;in search of them. They are drawn to intriguing and unique experiences, even for the most basic of product, but those are not available. They are looking to engage with personalized service that is at least as knowledgeable and savvy as they are. Again, few to be found. Retail needs to acknowledge that the consumer market has shifted from &nbsp;a “mass market” to a “highly segmented and demanding market”. Their basic business strategy must change in order to match up with the new reality.

## A Shift in Strategy

While sticking to their core strategy of serving masses of products to masses of consumers, from Macy’s to JCP to Kohl’s and beyond, stores are continuing to force the new consumer, along with new brands and new products to search for a better way. Technology is assisting these consumers in their global search for things that meet their needs and desires. Make no mistake about it, these consumer segments will find channels, and brands, and products and services on which to spend their money. It will be those who adjust their strategy to focus on and deliver to their chosen segment(s) the things that they hold most dear. The consumer will eventually be served. Which retail format will serve them is yet to be determined.

*This post was originally published in [The Robin Report](http://www.therobinreport.com/why-the-consumer-is-so-frustrated-with-retail-today/).*